Heather L. Harden
Ph.D Student in Psychology

    Children learn mathematics better when using their hands--whether spontaneously or when instructed to produce specific gestures (Broaders et al., 2007; Cook & Goldin-Meadow, 2006). Gesturing may facilitate learning by helping children extract meaningful information implicit in their hand movements (Goldin-Meadow, Cook & Mitchell, 2009). A criticism of studies that manipulate how children move their hands is that the rote-like movements are not true gestures, since they are not direct representations of the child’s thoughts. My proposed project will use Python to create a novel gesture coding technique that will help me identify whether hand movements taught to children turn into more authentic gestures as children gain understanding of math problems. By identifying which characteristics of movement change over the course of learning, it may be possible to predict a child’s state of knowledge from their hands alone and to manipulate movement instruction to enhance learning.  

    The aim of my research study is to identify movement characteristics that reflect different stages of learning. I am investigating this issue by coding videos from a previous experiment (Goldin-Meadow et al., 2009), in which the hand movements produced by third and fourth graders were manipulated during a lesson about mathematical equivalence. Children who were unable to solve pretest problems (e.g., 2 + 3 + 8 = __ + 8) were randomly assigned to one of three groups, each with its own learning strategy. Everyone then solved six problems and repeated the words and gestures they were taught before and after solving each problem. Children taught a correct grouping gesture (a V point with the index and middle fingers to the 2 and the 3 in the above example, followed by a point with the index finger to the blank) were more likely to succeed on a posttest after training than children taught an incorrect gesture (V point to the 3 and 8 and index point to the blank) or no gesture at all. Since the grouping strategy was expressed only in the gesture, this shows that children can incorporate information from their movements into their explicit understanding of the problems. The group who pointed at the wrong numbers learned more than children who didn’t use their hands at all, which suggests that gesture does not help by just directing attention to relevant numbers--specific aspects of the movements must be conveying information that helps children learn. The question I address is: When do children’s movements change from being rote recitations of the movements they were taught to being gestures that truly reflect, and influence, their understanding of the math problem?

    To address this question, I am developing a novel method for coding gesture using Python that will allow me to identify changes in continuous movement characteristics, including gesture speed, acceleration, trajectory, and handshape across space. To do this, I identify the onset and offset of each gesture using ELAN software, create movie clips from the video of the experimental session using an Apple Script, and then export each ~3 second clip into still images at a rate of 10 frames per second using QuickTimePro. I will then use a Python script to code the gestures. The script will first prompt me to input four numbers that coorespond to the frames containing the start and end of the two gesture strokes (the maximum expression of the V and index points). I will determine these four frames in advance by viewing the still images in order. Identifying these parts of the overall gesture will allow me to separately analyze each phase of the total movement: the preparation when the hand is brought up to the board, the transition from 2 fingers to 1 finger, and the retraction when the hand is brought back to the child’s side. The script will then prompt me to click on the location of the six items in the problem on the whiteboard (first 3 numbers, equals sign, blank, and fourth number). Then the script will begin presenting each of the frames in a random order. I will code the hand shape by typing either 1 (for an index point), 2 (for a 2-fingered V point), or 3 (for unclear shapes, e.g., blurry, obscured by the child's body, or off-screen). Then I will click on the location of the child's index fingertip (and then middle fingertip for the V frames). If the frame is coded as unclear (3), I will just click on the approximate location of the child's index knuckle. The output from each gesture, including the x and y coordinates of the hand in each frame, will be saved into a separate file.

    Once I have coded all the frames for each of the child's 6 gestures, I will run another Python script that aggregates the data from the 6 files into one file that is formatted in the ideal way for my statistical analyses. I will then make another file that consolidates the data for all of the children in a format that I can import into R or PANDAS. From the data output, I will be able to identify the frame where each child transitioned from pointing with 2 fingers to 1 finger and where in space this transition occurred relative to the equals sign of the problem. For my data analyses, I will test if each measure differed across time between the group of children who learned how to solve the problems during the six gesture training phase (the "learners") and the children who never got a problem correct (the "non-learners"). I will also be able to look across experimental conditions and compare children taught the correct gesture to those taught the incorrect gesture. 